Document how grants and fees work with LF (#179)
jupyter-governance/ec-team-compass: docs/finances.md

We need a clear policy for who decides how that money is spent.
:::

## Grants on behalf of a subproject

A grant "for Jupyter" can be received two ways:

- Into one of the LF entities above, so the money sits inside Jupyter's own structures.
- By an outside organization (for example, a university) that does the work and administers the grant directly.

Which route makes sense depends on who is best placed to execute the grant, and on where you want the money and its overhead to land (see below).

:::{warning} Open question: approval for grant work on Jupyter technology
We need a process for approving grant work that involves Jupyter technology.
A grant commits people to a particular vision and execution plan, and we want to be sure the project is aligned with both before anyone signs on.
Otherwise others can get legally committed to work that Jupyter isn't ready to accept.
:::

## G&A fees (overhead, indirect, etc)

The LF charges a general and administrative (G&A) fee on funds to cover the cost of administering them.
The fee is assessed when the money lands in its _final destination fund_, not when it first arrives.

> - The rate is **9%** on the first $1M a project receives in a year, and **6%** on anything received above $1M that year.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The rate is **9%** on the first 1 million USD a project receives in a year, and **6%** on anything received above 1 million USD that year.
```

> - The 501(c)(3) on its own receives less than $1M per year, so money that _stays there_ is charged the **9%** rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The 501(c)(3) on its own receives less than 1 million USD per year, so money that _stays there_ is charged the **9%** rate.
```

So routing money through the larger fund can reduce the overhead taken out of a grant.

## Restricted funds and how transfers are tracked

There is a tradeoff between moving money into the Directed Fund for the lower overhead and keeping it separately controlled in the 501(c)(3).

When the 501(c)(3) transfers money into the Directed Fund, it goes in without conditions.
This is deliberate: attaching conditions would make the money "restricted funding" under IRS rules and trigger extra reporting requirements.
The cost of avoiding that is that the money becomes part of the Directed Fund's single pot rather than a separately tracked bucket.

The Directed Fund's governing board then allocates that money where it best fits.
It can steer funds toward the priorities the Executive Council has laid out, so the EC's intent can still be honored in practice.
What it cannot do is make that an explicit written commitment tied to the transfer, since that would be the kind of condition that creates restricted funding.

If keeping funds under the Executive Council's direct control matters more than the lower overhead, the money can instead stay in the 501(c)(3).

> It has its own budget and governance, but funds there pay the higher 9% G&A rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It has its own budget and governance, but funds there pay the higher 9% G&A rate until the 501(c)(3) itself raises more than 1 million USD in a year.
```
